# mimic_ML
A decision support tool aimed at practicing clinicians facing the difficult problem of evaluating a patient's readiness to be weaned off of mechanical ventilation. Mechanical ventilation involves assisting a patient breathe via a tube inserted into a patient's trachea to ensure adequate oxygenation and removal of excess carbon dioxide from the lungs. It is paired with sedation to make the presence of the tube tolerable. It is a mainstay procedure in intensive care units (ICUs) in the U.S.; however, despite its ubiquity, practicing clinicians may find the correct choice of sedation level and mechanical ventilation support hard to precisely determine. This is especially true for critically ill patients, who often have multiple comorbidities and whose clinical condition may not easily fit into existing clinical protocols.

This decision support tool was developed as an application of recently developed methods in machine learning. The crux of the methodology used Q-learning, a prevalent technique used in reinforcement learning (RL) that trains algorithms to select an optimal action given both information about the patient's clinical state and a set of available action choices. The students trained the algorithm to choose an optimal choice among the feasible combinations of whether or not to wean from mechanical ventilation (also known as extubation in clinical parlance) and sedation level (chosen from 4 possible sedation tiers). This approach to reinforcement learning relies on having granular data on a patient's condition throughout their ICU stay. The students were able to source this data from the MIMIC III (Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care) database, one of the few publicly available, de-identified, and large scale datasets containing the entire electronic health records (EHR), including vitals time series, medication dosages, procedures, and physician notes, from actual ICU patients admitted to the Beth Deaconess medical center (Boston, MA) between 2001-2012. The data consist of 53,423 distinct hospital admissions for adult patients (ages 16 and older) and 7,870 neonates admitted to the neonate intensive care unit.

Developed alongside Daniela De Albuquerque and Nicholas Lenz.
